[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MERIDITH: HeatherAsh
Amara, like many of us,
felt the need to
return to nature
and delved into
European shamanism
to create her own
brand of feminism.
Her book "Warrior
Goddess Training"
takes people through
a step-by-step process
to connecting with
one's deeper femininity.
But before we go to the
step-by-step part of this,
I thought we would have a
larger, broader conversation.
Because I think
that times really
require to go into depth
on the conversation
about what's happening
with the feminine
at this period in history,
And not just here,
but also globally.
And the good news is you came
back relatively recently,
a few months ago, a
couple of months ago,
from India and Bali where you
spent a fair amount of time
in an ashram with
Amma, the hugging Amma.
There are lots of Ammas,
but the hugging Amma,
which I think some of our
viewers may be familiar with.
So I think first of all
I wanted to find out
about the notion of ashram
life these days, because so
many people are so overwhelmed
that the notion of just putting
it all aside, giving
up their apartment
and heading to India
to live in an ashram
is starting to
sound really good.
But there are
responsibilities with it.
Let's just talk about
ashram life a bit.
>>HEATHERASH AMARA: Absolutely.
And that was
definitely my desire
was I wanted to go
someplace where there
was a container already set
that I didn't have to think,
that I didn't have to
figure out what I was going
to do every day, and to
just be able to rest,
to really let
myself settle into.
And there are responsibilities
for being there as well.
So it's not like I'm just
going to go kick back and drink
margaritas and be on the beach.
It's very much about
going inside and getting
quiet and being part
of a huge community.
The ashram that I was out
there were 7,000 people there,
because it was over Christmas.
So busy.
And so navigating that many
people and staying quiet
is great, because
you really get to how
do I find my center in
the middle of all of this.
And also to be in
service, because that's
one of the main things
that we do at the ashram
is that everybody gets a sava.
Everybody gets some task
that you're doing every day
to give back to the community.
And I felt really blessed--
>>REGINA: What was your task?
>>AMARA: I got to sweep.
I was one of the sweepers.
And so every morning I would get
up and use the broom and sweep
the path and clean up bird poo
and get on the hands and knees
and mop the floor.
And I loved it.
Totally loved it.
I have friends who were
like how did you do that?
Wasn't it really hard?
No, it was great for me.
Because, again,
especially as a woman that
has a lot of responsibility and
that is a leader of a community
here, to be able to go
someplace and let all of that go
and have nobody know who
I am and be in service
was such a gift for me.
It was really, really beautiful.
>>REGINA: Do they still use
those lovely handmade brooms
there?
>>AMARA: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I love those.
I even I like watching
people sweep with them.
I mean I probably wouldn't
mind doing it myself.
But there is such a
graceful kind of way
those brooms even
move, which is I always
liked watching people when
they were sweeping in India.
I don't know why.
It's just one of those things.
It was kind of hypnotic.
So I can understand
why you resonated
with that particular chore.
So 7,000 people.
And then beyond that do you
have any other responsibility
within the community besides
that particular chore
that you're assigned?
>>AMARA: There's the chore.
Then there's also, in this
case with this ashram,
Amma would come out to stage
every day and do darshan.
And one of the
things that she asked
is all the foreigners to
sit on the stage with her
for 45 minutes.
And so that was a
part of it, too,
was when she was giving
meditation instructions
at the beach to be
there, to be onstage
when that was happening.
And besides that, it was
mostly then navigating
what did you want to create
for yourself during the day.
There was a lot of
spaciousness in that way.
And also a lot of distraction.
So for me, it was fun
navigating, meeting people,
and also remembering
what am I here to do.
>>REGINA: Are you in
a dorm setting or do
you have more private rooms?
>>AMARA: All in a dorm setting.
>>REGINA: So that's why it's
hard to find the quiet time.
>>AMARA: Yeah, exactly.
And usually there
were two to a room.
And there were four to a
room because of how busy
the ashram was during this time.
But I would navigate.
I would find-- and this is
true everywhere-- there's
always places that are quiet.
There's always places that
we can settle into nature.
And so there was a
garden that I found
that I showed to my roommates
at the end of my stay.
And they were like, how,
where, how did you find this?
I don't know, I just
listened and looked around
and found this little spot
that hardly anybody knew about.
And then going to the beach
and hanging out with the nature
there was really beautiful.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's such
a completely different pace
of life, too.
I remember coming
back from India.
I was in Tiru and the
little quiet Amma is there.
And she is, I mean, I
think one of the most
delightful creatures on
the planet in that she
doesn't have a thing to say.
But her energy-- she's
been quiet for 30 years.
But when she comes out
into her little chair
in her little ashram, there
is a type of power that
hits the room that is palpable.
And she is only
there for 15 minutes.
And one time I thought
I'm going to open my eyes
and see what she's up to.
And I watched what she was
doing around the room looking
at how she would
parrot certain people.
And my son was there as well
on the other side of the room.
And he was doing the same thing.
And she noticed both
of us very quickly
and sent an amazingly
powerful blast of energy
that almost knocked us over, a
ball of energy, into our chest,
with that same little smile.
You know just as
sweet as can be.
And that was really, to me,
the most delightful time.
There was no
exchange of anything.
It was just energy
and you're left
to make of the day and your
own thoughts what you wish.
You know.
That's really beautiful.
>>AMARA: Yes.
And I had a similar
experience with Amma.
I've never had a huge
experience when I hug her.
Some people will say these
great experiences they've had.
And I've been like, I just
like being around her energy.
Like, I love that.
So the third time I went up
to do darshan and get my hug--
the first time, I just went
for myself, the second time I
went to say thank you to her.
And the third time I was in
line, I'm like what do I want--
what's my focus for this time?
And I realized I
want to open myself
to take in this deep feminine
massive love that she holds.
And I want to open to that
so I can bring it back
to my community in the States.
And when I got the hug
from her that time,
it was like that was the
right thing to ask for.
Because I could feel she
tuned in and just whoaw.
Here you go sweetheart.
So that was a huge gift.
>>REGINA: That's wonderful.
And on that subject,
I flashback to what
it was like returning
from India through London.
I had things to do
in London for awhile.
And I was kind of
like everybody.
Once you've been there
for a little bit,
you don't want to put
Western clothes on.
You love all the
beautiful color.
And again, I want to go
back to this in a moment.
In Tiru on that
side of the country,
the women are still in
traditional clothing.
They don't wear
Western clothing.
And the sway of the silk and
the colors wafting in the wind.
And like I said, women sweeping
with their wedding bangles on.
There is this feminine
beauty that personally, I
haven't experienced anywhere
else on the planet in that way.
But we're going to
couple that with what's
really going on on
the ground, too,
because there are two
different stories going on.
But then coming back into
London where the men are gray,
with gray clothing and
black clothing, bustling by.
Won't even help you with a
bag if you're struggling.
Just kind of pushing
by you in such a hurry,
was an assault in the way
of going from the feminine
to the masculine.
And so can you comment
on this a little bit?
Because you were away
for awhile and had
to come back to Western,
more masculinized reality.
>>AMARA: Yes.
And it definitely
is a transition.
And the sense of as I went
from India to Bali where
people's hearts are
so open, hugely open,
and that was the thing I
noticed the most of coming back
to the States is
like there's hardly
anybody here who wanders
around with their heart open.
Most of us are so armored and
so protective and so busy.
So I felt a deep longing of
like can I just go back to Bali?
And that focus-- what
I call that warrior,
we're getting things done,
extreme warrior energy.
And so it's always
an adjustment.
Because I do feel
like the feminine,
that energy is so much
about flow, and beauty,
and bringing that forward.
And so it made me even
more dedicated to bringing
like how do I anchor that in
my being so strongly so I don't
get pulled back into
quick we have to rush
and we have to
make things happen.
How do I bring that back and
stay connected to that energy
and to that wisdom?
>>REGINA: And it is
a double-edged sword.
And this is something--
I mean we're having
a larger conversation
about the feminine today.
And we are at a very
interesting, and also
powerful and delicate,
point in history.
Because when we
look at these women
with their openheartedness,
also there's
a lot of pain behind it.
There's a lot of abuse.
There's a lot of spousal abuse.
This is pretty
typical, actually.
>>AMARA: Yes.
Unfortunately.
>>REGINA: And then to
go in the afternoons
to satsang, or whatever, and
to kind of release yourself
of your guilt as a
man and go back and do
the same practices the
next day against the family
and the wife.
This is a very--
and yet we're going
to these places
seeking spiritual upliftment.
This is one bone I do
have to pick about it.
Now if you're going
to an ashram that
has a very high level
of consciousness, that
exists with all the people that
are coming and participating,
you're in a bubble.
But when you go into the
countryside at large,
it may look colorful and
feminine and beautiful,
but that is not the reality
of what's happening.
>>AMARA: Yes, that is very--
>>REGINA: And so you kind of
have to separate those two out.
And the same in Bali, the same
in many, many other third world
nations although
they're coming along.
So let's look at this notion--
and then we're going
to switch to the West--
of how you would even
begin to embody that.
And then begin expressing
it in a meaningful way when
you return home.
>>AMARA: Yes.
And it's true.
There is so much trauma still
being perpetrated and held
in all countries, but especially
in developing nations.
It's so rough.
And especially India is
one of the worst, really.
>>REGINA: It is.
>>AMARA: One of the
most, most challenging.
And what I learned from
being there this time--
because I've been
there many times.
And I think most people
that have been to India
have total love-hate
relationship with it.
Like you love it
and you hate it.
Because it's one of
the most difficult
places to be on the planet.
It really is.
It's such a contradiction.
And it's also a great place to
learn how to hold all of it.
How to open enough to hold the
incredible beauty of the women
and that the grace
that they have
and the femininity
that just comes out,
and also the worship
of the feminine,
like how much the goddess
is really honored there,
and to hold that.
And not to ignore or press away
the fact that there are still
a lot of abuse and trauma,
and misogyny that's happening.
And how to hold that.
And that's the skill I
feel like we all need.
Because the temptation is
I just want to pretend this
isn't happening.
So I can just love this
part but then we split.
And we're not being honest.
And we're cutting that part
of ourself off as well.
And so that practice of how do
I hold this incredible dichotomy
that's painful in
such a way that I'm
able to embrace all of it and
stay steady in the center,
and that was my practice.
Like how do I stay steady
with what's happening?
All of it.
And it's challenging.
And that's why we
get to practice.
We have lots of
opportunity for practice.
>>REGINA: Of course.
Let's switch the lens
over to the Western world
and the United
States in particular.
So over the last
30 years, as women
have been able to take
on more responsibility,
spend less time at home,
less time with the kids,
less time with the
husband, more time at work,
more time developing competitive
masculine traits in general,
we've fairly well
accomplished that.
And I mean you got
to keep thinking back
to coming back with these lovely
soft cotton and silk things
on and arriving at the airport
like a typical want-to-be
American with the Indian garb.
And then shoving, shoehorning,
myself into a pair
of jeans the next day, right?
And the horrible feeling of
that fabric against the skin.
The constriction of
it, the total lack
of femininity in wearing
jeans, for example.
And yet that has become
a utilitarian uniform
in the Western world.
I would even go so far as
to say there's probably--
because I can tend to
go that way anyway--
perhaps even a conspiracy around
it to create gender neutrality.
And it's worked really well.
So here we are.
We're stuffed in jeans.
We wear that same
clothing men wear.
We're competing for jobs.
We're competing for
places out of college.
So now let's look at
that as contrasted
to the other and your perception
of the net effect of that
on society now and on men.
And how you would choose
to begin working with that
and bridging it?
>>AMARA: Beautiful.
Great question.
Well one thing I look at
the big picture of where
we are right now in terms
of women's empowerment
and the feminist movement and
relationship with men and work
is that just 100 years
ago or 200 years ago,
women had almost no freedom.
We had no external freedom.
And now we have a lot.
We can have pretty much
whatever job we want.
We can partner with
who we want to.
We can vote.
Yea.
And yet, a lot of women
aren't free on the inside.
We still are
comparing ourselves.
We're still putting ourselves
in these little boxes.
And there was a phase
where women went
through becoming more like men.
And this happens
with all peoples--
where there's a
disparity in the power
is that there's
always a phase that
happens where the people that
are oppressed, we can say,
take on the traits of the people
that have power because that's
the only way in.
That's the only way there's
going to be any respect.
And so that's a phase.
And we're starting to
come out of that phase.
Yea.
Which is exciting.
Where women are starting--
and I hear this all the time--
women are starting
to say, I don't
want to be something that's
not who I actually am.
And we're starting to realize
that we've put ourselves
in these boxes in
order to get through.
But we're not expressing are
our authentic self or our
how we want to be in the world.
>>REGINA: Well we're now going
into the second and third
generation away
from classic kind
of feminine
responsibility/traits.
But again, the
benefit upside of it
is exactly everything
you spoke about.
And now how do you how do
you begin reintegrating what
does the new society look like?
Because then we have to look
at the men's side of it.
>>AMARA: Absolutely.
And we've been in this
power dynamic of power over.
If you have more resources
and more money and more stuff,
then you have power.
And the shift, the
paradigm shift,
right now is really
delicate in a way.
Because what always
happens, too,
when there's transformation
is that it gets amped.
So the place of power over
gets stronger and stronger
and stronger because
it's trying to stay
as this is the paradigm
that's the most important.
So it starts amping.
And then the change
is trying to come in,
but it takes time and
patience and perseverance.
And so what I say and
hold over and over
again is that we have to be
willing for it to be messy--
with ourselves, with men,
with the dialogue between men
and women, with all the gender.
There's so much change
and fluidity happening.
And we would like it
to be really neat.
And just like do this and this
and this and it'll be fine.
And it's going to be messy.
We're in a big change right now.
And so how to be
with the messiness.
And be OK with the messiness.
And know that we're learning.
And that we want to
include everybody.
We have to include everybody.
That if we're really going to
make this change where we're
honoring each person's
power, where they are,
what their expression is,
that takes time to undo.
And we start with
ourselves of the undoing.
Where is it that I've put
myself, made myself small?
Where is it that I'm
carrying forward something
from my ancestry
or from my heritage
or from my society that
isn't actually mine?
And I just see it as
cleaning the closet.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And now that gets into probably
an even deeper subject.
Again, if you go back
to India, for example,
reincarnation-- and
much of the world,
much of the world
reincarnation is a given.
It's understood that
is how the soul works.
It goes through these
cycles of learning.
And taking that into
account, we have
women who are accomplished.
They've pretty much
ticked off the list,
they're doing fabulously.
But then you put them
back in a relationship
with a man and one of the
first things that happens,
subconsciously and
almost automatically,
we either start shrinking
down or giving our power away
or catering to.
Just like our mothers
did with our brothers
or our fathers or what not.
And that is not
gone, by any means.
That is such a
hard-wired program
to put men above ourselves,
whether we know it or not.
Even if we're a
Miss Bossy Pants.
On some level, that happens.
Unless we have a man who
is completely willing
to be subservient.
And some men are.
Or some they want that.
Some men are comfortable
that with a very strong,
powerful woman.
But looking at a kind
of more average dynamic,
let's call it that, this
is really interesting.
Because all those past life
wounds are still there.
And we're talking thousands
of years of programming.
>>AMARA: Yes.
Thousands of years
of programming.
It's in our DNA.
That's in our bodies so deeply.
And we could have been raised by
a really empowered mother that
are like you can do this.
And yet, that will come
back up, because we're
not free on the inside yet.
And I think sometimes
women get confused,
because we have so
many external freedoms.
And I've been having
radio interviews recently
with really
conservative radio that
are saying things like women
have like all the rules.
It's fine.
Like women are equal.
They're equal on the books.
What are you guys
complaining about?
And to just educate all
of us that we're still
tied to so many old values
that we're carrying forward
that we don't even realize.
And it's so true.
We'll get in a situation
in like two or three years
into a relationship
like what have I done?
Because it's so ingrained
that we pass our power
over without realizing it.
And so the first place is how do
we become aware of the dynamic
and then not punish
ourselves for it.
But just realize big shift
in the process of happening.
And it's not personal.
>>REGINA: Well, it seems
to me, in my experience,
it requires a tremendous
amount of open communication.
And the other thing
is, for example,
taking women's traits--
along this same line--
one thing women have
lived by-- if men
have lived by overt
competition among themselves,
kind of straight up and
punch someone in the nose.
And the next day
you're friends again.
That's not true with women.
It's a completely different,
more subversive kind of reality
in that we would tend
to sabotage one another.
And that's part of what
gossip is all about.
Sabotage one
another, for example.
To feel a lot of envy,
a lot of jealousy.
But then if you
start looking back,
where you were essentially
right up till quite recently,
is a property of
someone that could
be that was totally
dependent upon them.
They could be thrown over
for the next person that
comes along or someone
prettier, or younger, or kinder,
or who baked better, whatever.
You could be thrown
over at any minute
and have no means of support.
Now that's deep in the aura.
Survival is always at stake.
>>AMARA: Yes, yes.
And that sense of
safety is huge.
And to recognize that's so much
what's driving our behaviors.
>>REGINA: It's true.
And to really help men
understand, because they think
women are just nuts,
or they're psycho,
or they're irrational,
unreasonable.
I didn't do a thing.
Why is she accusing me of that?
And it is.
It does look irrational from
the outside when this happens.
But the reality is
it's based in something
so deep that would make a very
rich conversation if people
could go there.
>>AMARA: If people
And it's so true, us
opening up the conversations
between men and women.
Women opening up the
conversation around competition
and sabotage and backstabbing.
And really beginning to say
how do we deal with this?
How do we talk about this
without shaming each other?
How do we point it out?
And how do we start
changing our behavior?
>>REGINA: So have you begun
working with this with women
to help them begin these
dialogues with each other?
>>AMARA: Yes.
Absolutely.
And part of what I do
is bring women together
to have the experience
of being supported.
Because what I'm finding--
which shocked me,
because I've been so blessed.
I've had so many good
women circles and friends
and I've just been
incredibly blessed--
but a lot of the women that I
work with have never had that.
Ever.
They've only felt competition.
You know maybe they
have one friend.
But to be then in a space for
them where all of a sudden
there are all these women
supporting them and seeing
them and loving them for where
they're at it is mind blowing.
And they'll be just
like I didn't even
know this was possible.
And so that for me
is like level number
one is open the door to
show what's possible.
That women actually
can support each other.
And that you can
be held and seen,
and reflected, and
cheerleaded on.
And that then once they have
that sense of this is possible,
then--
because it's not just all
magic and that's how it is--
then our stuff
starts showing up.
And then we have
to then do the work
to clean out the old agreements
and beliefs that we have,
the old patterns and habits.
But to really
recognize it's not--
so often women feel so
much guilt and shame
for their actions or how
they've been treated--
>>REGINA: Or even
their feelings.
>>AMARA: Yes Yeah.
And we feel like it's
I'm the only one.
And to take the context
bigger and say look
at what we're in the middle
of transforming right now,
it's huge.
And each of us is doing
big work to do that.
>>REGINA: How
successful-- I mean,
I'm assuming this is being
done because women are looking
to not only find that kind
of honesty in themselves,
but to create this within
their relationships.
>>AMARA: Yes.
>>REGINA: So why
don't we start talking
about how you began working
with women to open up
this dialogue, kind
of the process of it.
And then how you
instruct them to begin
opening up this
process of working
with their significant others.
Or if they're single,
to begin laying
the framework for having
a healthy relationship
with someone.
>>AMARA: Yeah.
Well, I start by doing
an overview that we all
have conscious agreements.
And I think of as the
tip of the iceberg
is the conscious agreements.
And in a relationship,
a good relationship,
you're clear with what
your agreements are
in term of the
relationship, whether that's
a relationship at
work, whether that's
an intimate relationship.
And so at work you
know our agreement
is I'm going to work
for this many hours,
and get paid this much, and
this is my job description.
And that's clear.
And we often don't do
that in relationships.
Because we don't
even think about it.
And it doesn't
sound very romantic.
But it's so important.
So those-- so those
unconscious agreements,
there's actually not that
many, because we're not
trained this way.
But there's a lot-- if
you look at the iceberg.
This is the tip underneath of
all the unconscious agreements.
And those are what actually
drive all of our behaviors.
And they're incredibly
powerful, because they're often
coupled with emotion.
So they're super strong.
And you can be doing great and
like rocking it at your work
and getting along
with your parents.
And then you get into a
relationship and puh really
difficult. Suddenly you're
talking like a little girl.
You're not sharing
what's going on with you.
Or you're trying to please.
And so to look at--
I guide women to look at what
are the unconscious agreements?
And to start to bring them up--
>>REGINA: So how do you do this?
What are the methods of
doing this with women?
>>AMARA: Part of it's dialogue.
Part of it's brainstorming.
To get a bunch of women in
the room and to say, OK,
what did you learn?
What was modeled
from your parents?
What did you learn
from your peer group?
And so to start throwing
things out and brainstorming
and increasing the awareness.
And then to increase
the awareness
to go out into your world
and start paying attention to
how am I responding to things?
What am I thinking?
What am I feeling?
And I call this stalking.
Learning to stalk ourselves so
that we're watching constantly
from that place of witness and
being really, really curious.
And where most women get stuck
is that we judge ourselves.
And the moment you judge
yourself, you become aware
and then you judge
yourself, the energy
you need to make the change
goes into the judgment.
And so learning how to
witness yourself is huge.
Just that piece.
And then that place
of awareness then.
Then we can start
to transform it.
We can't transform what
we're not aware of.
>>REGINA: And so
you're suggesting that
by simply watching your feelings
and watching your observations
that this is going to
be the doorway to all
of that subconscious stuff?
>>AMARA: It absolutely helps.
Yes.
Because you start realizing,
wow, somebody just
cut me off in traffic.
And instead of getting
pissed about that, now
I'm thinking about the way that
my father never listened to me.
And most of the times we
wouldn't even notice that.
But the moment you
open your awareness
and you're watching
what's happening,
you're like whoa
what is it that?
My father doesn't listen to me.
Where else have I
heard myself say that?
Whoa, I just said that
to my partner yesterday.
Hmm.
That's curious.
>>REGINA: So basic mindfulness--
>>AMARA: Basic mindfulness.
>>REGINA: --in being observant
of what you're feeling
and what's going on in the
moment is the primary strategy.
>>AMARA: Foundation.
That's the foundation.
And then the
transformational part
is then around starting to do
things that break old patterns.
>>REGINA: OK.
So give us some examples
of how you have people
break their old patterns.
>>AMARA: So there's
two ways that I
work with people around that.
I mean, there's a gazillion,
but we'll say two main ones.
One is to do what
we call not doings.
So to look at what your
habits are and start
doing things that are opposite.
So really simple ones are
things like putting your clothes
on a different way, driving to
work a different way every day,
brushing your teeth
with your opposite hand.
And it seems very like,
well, that's so simple.
And what you're doing, though,
is you're reclaiming energy.
Because every time
you break a pattern
that's been unconscious,
you become more conscious.
And that opens up your
awareness in a beautiful way.
And then also to
start doing things
where you're not going
to have any reward.
Because in this
society, we are totally
geared towards what am I
going to get from this?
What's the reward?
And that, especially for
women, takes us way off base.
Because a lot of us, as women,
are caretaking or pleasing
or trying to figure out what
other people need and we
have no idea who we are
or what we actually want.
And so to start taking
actions, doing something really
impeccably, like rearranging
something in your house,
that you make it really
perfect, and then
you completely undo it.
Going outside and
digging a hole and making
like the perfect hole, and
then filling it back in again.
So things that, again, the
mind's like, what is she doing?
But we learn then to
be 100% in an action
that we're taking without
needing the reward for it.
And that starts the
rewiring process.
So these are ways to begin
unwinding the old structures
and beginning to create more
spaciousness inside of a self.
And the other thing I
love doing with people
is running experiments.
We often, especially women,
and I know this is true of men
as well, but we don't
want to make mistakes.
We want to do it
perfectly and often we
live with this image of
this is who I should be.
And so we constantly compare
ourselves to that image
instead of actually living here.
And we cause ourselves
tremendous suffering,
because instead of like, Hi,
sweetie what do you need today?
How are you doing?
We're saying I
should be that way.
I should be like I
was 20 years ago.
Or I should be--
whatever we compare, we use
things against ourselves.
And so this place of then
settling into right here.
What is it that I want
to change in my life?
And what experiment
can I run to change it?
So I'll give you
a great example.
I had a friend who
was a big pleaser.
She loved to make sure everybody
else in the world was OK.
And she started to recognize how
she wasn't standing in herself.
She was just, somebody
would ask her something,
she'd be like yes, yes, yes.
She wanted to be an artist
but didn't have time
to be an artist, she was
busy fixing everybody else.
So the assignment I gave her, I
said, let's run an experiment.
Run it for a week.
And what I'd like
you to do is anytime
anybody asks you for
anything, your response is no.
And don't explain, just say, no.
So it was very
funny, because what
happened is four days into
the experiment, I called her.
And I'd forgotten she was
doing this experiment.
And I said, hey, can you take
me to the airport next week?
And she goes no.
But call me next week.
And I was like, oh, you
are so busted, honey.
And I called her
the following week
and I said how many times
did you go back and say yes
when you had said no?
She said every single time.
I said, OK, let's try
another experiment.
So her next experiment
was to say no again.
But this time we made it three
months or to not wash dishes.
And she actually picked
that one, because to her
that was inconceivable.
She was a big potluck
person, big in the community,
and she was always the
person cleaning up.
So here's what happens when
we start to break patterns.
Again, seems super simple, I'm
just not going to wash dishes.
She went through so much
because her guilt came up.
Her fear that people were going
to think that she was selfish.
Her feeling that
she was worthless.
Like all of this old
childhood stuff came up simply
by her not washing dishes.
And with her staying steady
and being aware of it,
and loving herself, and
supporting herself, and saying,
we're going to get
through this, that stuff
started to move and shift.
And at the end of
the three months,
she was at total choice.
Wherever she went,
she was like, oh,
I do feel like
washing dishes, oh, I
don't feel like washing dishes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
No, I think things are
wonderful experiments.
>>AMARA: So fun and deep.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Well now when you talk
about women always giving,
that is true.
But they also have the list.
Women are looking for the list.
And it seems to me this is
not going well societally.
>>AMARA: Yes.
>>REGINA: They're
looking for partners,
or they're looking for
the partners they already
have to fulfill the list of
their desires and demands.
And the same thing when they're
looking for a new partner.
I know a number of
women who actually
write a list of
what the traits are,
the characteristics are, rather
than the heart or essence of.
It's as though women
have certainly,
every bit as much as men,
gotten away from the essence.
>>AMARA: Yes.
Very true.
And it's an ideal.
>>REGINA: And it's
a taking thing.
It's not a giving thing.
>>AMARA: It is.
It is.
And we have to be really
honest about that.
That we then take what we do
to ourself and then expect
like I'm going to try and live
up to this image of perfection.
And now I need you to live
up to my image of perfection.
And I'm going to judge you
and use things against you
in and punish you to
make you behave the way I
think you should be behaving.
>>REGINA: Punishment's always
a really good incentive,
isn't it?
>>AMARA: It's such
a great incentive.
>>REGINA: And yet people do it
subconsciously all the time.
Both sexes do this all the time.
>>AMARA: Absolutely.
And don't realize it.
And I've been in dialogue
with a lot of people
about this idea of what's
unconditional love, because we
sometimes think
unconditional love means
you can do whatever
you want, and I don't
have to have any boundaries.
I don't have to set--
like if you're
abusing me, that's
OK. because I love
you unconditionally.
Well what we're learning
to do is to be open,
is how I think
about it, and really
love who we're with
for who they are.
Knowing they're
going to be quirky.
There's going to be things
that they're working through.
And how do we find the
spaciousness and the grace
to accept people
for where they're
at but to accept ourselves
for where we are at,
because that's the real key.
And that takes practice
and communication.
So bring the willingness
to communicate
and be totally honest of like--
I would love you to stop
doing that and let me--
and I also know that it's
your right to do that.
>>REGINA: What about
issues of control and power
struggles when it
comes to control?
>>AMARA: Constant.
We're always.
And again, if we start to name
it and have fun with it-- what
I've seen moves things the
most within relationships
is if both people are willing
to play around the healing
and to not have this idea if
we're in a good relationship,
we never argue, we're
always completely loving
with each other, and
it's always perfect,
but to recognize
relationships take work.
And it doesn't have to
be hard work, though.
It can be play fun work.
With my ex-husband, we
would get into places
where we'd be really
furious with each other
around something.
Like something would happen,
we'd get mad at each other.
And instead of like I
hate it when you do this
and it really drives me crazy.
We would just start making
animal noises at each other.
And pretty soon
we'd be laughing.
And then we could have
a conversation about it.
And our hearts were
back open to each other.
And so to find ways to
play games with each other
and to communicate and to
know you're on the same team.
And sometimes that's what
happens in relationship
with the power
struggles is we feel
like our identity is
threatened or we're not
getting what we want.
And so we separate and see
our partner as our enemy
rather than realizing
we're on the same team.
How do we work together?
How do we stay in dialogue
and be creative in what
we're working through?
It's not easy.
>>REGINA: You talk
about, in the book,
you talk about warrior
goddess doesn't have any need
to control life, but also nor
any need to understand life.
Now what does that mean?
>>AMARA: We create
suffering for ourselves
when we think reality
should be a certain way.
And one of my favorite
quotes is from Byron Katie
who says, "You can
argue with reality
but reality is only going
to win 100% of the time."
And one of the things
that I love working with
is the seasons and the cycles.
And that we tend to think
life is supposed to be linear.
We get into this-- in
the West, we especially
are like life is linear.
If you just do this
and this and this,
then this will be the result.
But life doesn't work that way.
We want it to.
But life is about beginnings
and endings, constantly,
things dying, things being born.
It's messy.
And it's not controllable.
As much as we try to
think it is, it's not.
We can't control death.
With all that we've done,
we can't control death.
We can't control illness.
I mean we can manage it
sometimes, but not really.
And so how to be in relationship
with what's happening--
and it doesn't mean,
oh, well, it's just
the way it is, it means
being fully alive,
being with our grief
when there's grief,
being with whatever
emotion is there.
And loving all aspects of
being human is how I see it.
And so the control
piece just causes
us to be in pain and suffering.
And learning to open and to
trust that it may not feel good
in the moment and we can
learn to stay with life
and know that things are going
to constantly be changing.
That's the truth.
>>REGINA: You say
that it's good that--
one of the tenets is that we
have to take responsibility
for our family story.
So let's talk about that.
Let's again get into
the lineage stuff.
>>AMARA: Yes, yes.
We energetically carry
on what's come before us.
And I sometimes think of it as
a really bad game of telephone.
That something happened way--
and then it just
gets passed down.
So by the time that we
have whatever it is,
we don't even know where it came
from, it is slightly garbled.
So examples of things that
get passed down the lineage
will say women's
experience of needing
to stay small to be safe.
And not true so much in the
Western world, but very true
100 years ago, 200
years ago, for example.
So opening that the work
that we're doing now
is not just for ourself, it's
also to heal in the past.
It's also to heal forward.
And we're in this
incredible moment of time
that I feel like ripples
out in all directions.
Anything that we heal affects
time backwards and forwards.
And sometimes putting that
in that larger context
helps because we
don't feel so alone.
And we also feel, OK, I have the
motivation to transform this.
But to realize those energetic
patterns are very strong.
And in part of
the work that I do
is teach people how to
go back into their past,
this life and past lives,
but the ancestral piece
to reclaim energy
that we've lost.
And what most of us look
like as humans is colanders.
We're constantly leaking
energy without realizing it.
And a lot of our
energy is in the past.
And a lot of our--
and then these lines
of energy from our
ancestor also come through.
And so we're acting out of
those rather than acting out
of what's true for us.
And so very simple practices of
beginning to rewire ourselves,
giving ourselves permission to
bring our energy from the past
so it's totally present here.
And to learn how to call
energy up, hold that energy so
that we're not
leaking it back again,
and then choose where
we want to put it.
And it's such a deep, beautiful
rewiring of ourselves.
And the willingness to see what
am I carrying without blame,
because that doesn't heal.
The going back and
blaming, I can't
believe that my mother did
this or that my great, great
grandmother passed this stuff
on to me, it's not fair.
>>REGINA: But if
you go into past
lives that you did it yourself.
>>AMARA: Yes.
Yeah.
Exactly, exactly.
And this moment, we have
this incredible opportunity
through our awareness, through
our willingness, to love,
I believe, to bring love
as the healing balm.
Forgiveness as the
healing balm to start
to unwind these old patterns.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about sexuality
and how women use sexuality
often not to the best benefit
of themselves or anybody else.
>>AMARA: Yes, yes.
So we live in a society that has
really created such a huge rift
around sexuality.
And women often use
it, unfortunately,
as a way to get what
they think they want.
And the dichotomy is you're
supposed to be a virgin
and you're also supposed
to be a whore in some ways.
If you look at media,
there's these two extremes.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it's the classic.
Everyone understands it, right?
>>AMARA: It's classic.
So this place then for us,
again, to be really honest.
What am I doing
with my sexuality?
Where is the place that I've
put my sexuality as a tool
that I'm using to get
something and to really
recognize that sexuality
is our creative life force.
That it's for us.
And just that rewire for a
lot of women is like what?
How?
So this place of coming back
to doing deep healing with
the places that we've
gone against ourselves--
because so many of us have
been sexual when we didn't want
to, have used sexuality to
try and hook and get love--
>>REGINA: And a large
percentage of population
has been sexually abused,
even in childhood.
>>AMARA: Huge, huge percentage.
So there's all that
confusion and heaviness.
>>REGINA: As well, yeah.
So when you're working
with women in a group,
are you saying, then, to
go in-- again mindfulness--
go in to reevaluate why?
And when the opportunity
for sex comes up
why you would be motivated
to have sex in that moment?
And then take stock
and say, you know, no.
I don't think I want to go that
direction right now because I
wouldn't be honest in doing so.
And then do you state this
openly with your partner
and let your partner know you're
working in this way trying
to work this through yourself?
And so how do you
guide couples, then,
on this journey of becoming
sexually honest, beginning
with the part of the women?
>>AMARA: Yes.
I think about it as what
we're working to get to
with sexual integrity.
Where we know what
our sexual flow is.
We're honest with it.
We've cleaned up
the places of abuse
or we're in the process of that.
And we're owning my sexuality's
for me and my expression.
And then to then start that
dialogue with a partner of I'm
in this process.
And it's going to be awkward.
And sometimes it's
going to be messy.
And I'm going to
go against myself.
And I might be like,
yes, no, well--
So to set the stage of like
can we work this together?
And how do we work this
together and be creative?
>>REGINA: That's an
important conversation, yeah.
>>AMARA: Really important.
And a hard one to have
for a lot of women.
Especially if they've been
going against themselves over
and over and over again
and just thinking,
well, I'm just going to be
sexual because he wants to
or my partner wants to.
So to reclaim that
honesty and vulnerability.
And I think that's something
in partnerships that's
so powerful is when we
lead with vulnerability,
the conversation often
goes really different.
So the difference
between "there's
a lot of times I don't
like having sex with you
and so I want to change that,"
which immediately, you're
partner is like whoa.
Attack.
Ah.
Versus "I've been doing this
really deep healing work.
I'm starting to look at myself.
And I'm realizing that I've been
going against myself sometimes.
And I'm really scared to bring
this to you, because I would
guess this wouldn't feel good.
And I care about you.
And I want us to have a really
great sexual relationship."
"And the truth is I don't
know how to do this.
I don't how to do this rewire.
Can we talk about this?"
Is a really different
conversation.
So for women, the willingness
for us to lead with
vulnerability in relationships--
and I don't mean everywhere
because that's not the best
thing to do like at your job
or with your ex that
you're struggling with--
with intimate
relationships, it's
a really beautiful way to lead.
It's how do I bring
my vulnerability
of what I'm afraid of?
And that often
will open the door
so there's softness
that comes back.
Of like ooh, I want to,
OK, like how do we do this?
>>REGINA: And think that's
one of the things people tend
to not understand is that
when they're most vulnerable
is often when they're
most beautiful.
>>AMARA: So true.
>>REGINA: And we try
very hard to cover up
any of our weak links
and vulnerabilities.
And in fact, that's the
very thing that can heal it.
So I agree with you on that.
But again, when you
come to this situation,
a woman might be thinking
to herself, well,
if I'm to be really
honest, I'm just
kind of doing it for
everybody but me.
And maybe we're just
not compatible that way.
And maybe this
relationship will end
as a result of my being honest.
And that is another
area that I think women
are very afraid to look into.
>>AMARA: Yes, yes.
And I think that that's
where experimentation helps.
To be honest, it like,
well, that might be true.
And it might not be true.
And so are you
willing to say, OK,
for the next three months
I'm only going to have
sex when I want to have sex?
I'm just making something up.
And I'm also going to find
out what do I like sexually.
Like what turns me on?
What am I excited about?
And you can run all sorts
of sexual experiments
with your partner
or with yourself
or just start learning
about your body.
Like what is my body like now.
Because a lot of
women don't even know.
They just think, well, my
partner should know my body
or be able to figure it out.
Without us really
knowing what we like.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And there are a lot of
books on practicing,
and mystical sex, tantric
sex, although that's
horribly misunderstood.
>>AMARA: Unfortunately, yes.
Yeah, but just the idea
of let me explore this.
Let me start exploring what I
like now and asking for that.
Which is terrifying
for most women.
>>REGINA: It is.
In your book, you
talk about a quote
by Pablo Picasso, who
himself was a womanizer.
And basically saying there
are two kinds of women--
goddesses and doormats.
No why did you put
that in the book?
>>AMARA: Because I think
that there's a piece of that
that's true for us as women.
But it was such a stark
comment of like which
do you want to be?
And how do you
want to be treated?
And we are the ones that
are creating that energy.
If we hold "I'm a
doormat," that's
what's going to
come, unfortunately.
And I'm not excusing the
behavior at all, at all.
If we hold ourselves
as goddesses,
as we see this is my
temple, I am a goddess.
And I deserve to be respected.
I respect myself, everything
changes energetically.
And someone comes
towards us and we're
like no that's not
going to work for me.
And there isn't a fight, a
struggle, it's just nope.
I know who I am.
I know my value.
I know my worth.
I know that I am a
representation of the divine.
And that's what I
will attract and hold.
And if that's not what's coming,
then just, nope, no thank you.
And so that rewire, learning how
to rewire, because a lot of us
are in different places.
I mean there's places I
still go into doormat.
I'll get into a
particular relationship
and a particular thing.
And my little girl will
come out and like I just
want them to like me, OK.
And I watch myself.
And then I'll name it.
I'll be like, oh, I just
went into this pattern.
Let me like redo it.
And so we're all at
different levels.
>>REGINA: In the
book, why did you
choose to work with the terms
both warrior and goddess?
>>AMARA: I love both the terms.
And I feel like for
women we need both.
So warrior energy
is about focus.
It's clarity.
It's 100% I'm in.
And goddess energy is
about opening, receptivity,
creativity.
And I think that the warrior
energy says I'm going here.
I'm focused.
Nothing's getting in my way.
And the goddess
energy says, ooh, I'm
going to go over there.
Wonder how I can bring
all my friends with me.
I wonder how we can make this
really pleasurable and playful.
And we need both energies.
And it's not about if I'm 50%
warrior and I'm 50% goddess,
then I'll be balanced, at all.
It's what's my unique
expression of these energies.
And for some of us, we're
way more goddess oriented
and a little bit warrior.
>>REGINA: And what do
you mean by goddess?
>>AMARA: I mean there's that
deep, feminine, soft, open
multiple ways of
expressing self.
Because there are so
many types of goddesses,
there isn't just one goddess.
There's everything from
Guan Yin, deep compassion,
to Kali, fierce and clear.
And so this place
of goddess for me
is around owning our
divine feminine self
and our receptivity and
our love, that deep love.
And some of us,
that's how we roll,
that we're more in that
expressive creative.
And I also know a lot of
women that are really warrior.
And that's beautiful.
And they're feminine
as well, it's
just a different energetic.
So there isn't one way.
There's multiple ways to
blend these energies together.
>>REGINA: Do you feel--
because the word goddess
for the last 20 years
kind of came up and
has been used a lot.
And so what I'm
asking now is do you
feel equally as comfortable
then conversely calling
the men gods?
>>AMARA: That is such
a great question.
And for me the answer is no.
And I still haven't figured
out what's the right word.
>>REGINA: I have
never met a woman
who uses the word goddess that's
comfortable letting the men use
the word gods about themselves.
>>AMARA: I know, isn't it funny?
Yeah.
And I've been looking at that.
I'm like why is that?
And what is the term--
>>REGINA: Have you
figured it out?
>>AMARA: I haven't yet.
It's still, I'm still
really sitting with it
and asking about that.
>>REGINA: Yeah because it's
a term that sets one above,
so to speak.
Because you're talking
about other realms.
You're talking about
other non earthly realms
when you speak in the terms
of gods and goddesses.
And women seem-- again, this
is part of the woman thing
we have to be
honest about-- seem
to be perfectly happy to
claim the term goddess,
but are very offended if men
would say, well, I am a god.
>>AMARA: Yes, yeah.
And it's because of the power.
This is the dynamic that
we're in the middle.
Women are working
to own their power.
And so to say I'm a goddess is
the antidote we can say to I'm
not enough.
>>REGINA: It's like
an overcorrection.
>>AMARA: It's an overcorrection.
Exactly, exactly.
It is an overcorrection.
>>REGINA: I do.
I agree with that.
I think it is an overcorrection.
>>AMARA: Yeah.
I totally agree with that.
>>REGINA: So there's
going to have
to come a point when
we no longer feel
we need to overcorrect
and we can just
be women and men again.
>>AMARA: And we just be
human like all of it.
>>REGINA: Be humans again.
>>AMARA: Exactly.
I really agree.
And we also have to be honest
that there is a power dynamic.
And we are in a place of
trying to correct something.
And we hope with everything--
I hope with everything,
because I don't--
the labels is just a label.
The words are just words.
And they don't really
mean anything honestly.
It's all about us
expressing who we are.
But we use language to do that.
>>REGINA: And then it--
really all of it, everything
I've heard you say thus far--
is about our being able to
discern what's truthful.
And again this is
not an easy task
in that you can get glimpses
of it, because of our reactions
to life.
Right?
So you can think, hmm,
where did that come from?
And you can begin
back engineering a bit
as a result of reaction.
But in reality,
we don't know what
it is that lurks deep in the
subconscious for the most part
that is motivating a lot of it.
So and a person can
go, if they want to go,
into regression or
past life regression,
really start mucking
around in there.
You can get to some
of those details.
But this level of truth and
then acceptance at the same time
seems to be the sweet
spot where things
are going to start happening.
>>AMARA: Absolutely.
And we don't need to know
where things came from.
We only need to be able to
see what am I doing now,
like you're saying.
And then guess, well, what
agreement might have I made?
It doesn't matter where it
came from or which lifetime.
But what might I be
holding that's not true
that's holding me back.
>>REGINA: And that is, that's
a highly individual journey.
I tend to be one
that always wants
to get to the bottom of things.
I want to know the truth.
I've done loads of you
know regressions for fun.
But you stumble on things.
And one thing I've
come to realize
in going through quite a lot
of past life regressions,
really just for fun not
particularly looking
for a specific thing, is you
do bump up against truth,
deeper truths, or patterns.
Let's say patterns that have
happened again and again.
And that's where I really
started understanding
that is where the answer to this
conundrum between men and women
lie.
And I think again, again,
if this were my world.
And, you know, I kind of played
queen for a day, I'd say,
first of all if we can accept
the notion that we incarnate,
incarnate, incarnate, and
learn, and learn, and have
been through a lot.
And we can just kind of look
at that as a baseline reality,
then we can understand the depth
of the baggage that's there.
And once we understand
that, then we
can have a little
more open dialogue.
It's like, jeez, I remember
when I was vivisected last time.
That didn't go well.
The only value of knowing these
things is to kind of create--
and I'm not suggesting it's
for everyone, it's not--
but to create a portrait
of just how traumatized
every human being has been.
Men have been
vivisected even more so.
They've been on the battlefield.
They've been sequestered with
other men for years at a time.
That's created a whole
different sexual dynamic
that is embedded within men,
that perpetuates itself again
lifetime after lifetime,
and maybe in terms
of being attracted to other
men almost exclusively
and not understanding why.
And learning that,
OK, that is how
it was done when you were
in the military for 20
years of your life and
out on the road together.
It just worked out that way.
And so you develop propensities.
I mean it gets really
interesting when
you start mucking around in the
subconscious or the repository,
whatever you want to
call the repository,
for everything
one has ever been.
And if we can start working
through that dynamic,
I think we have a
chance at beginning
to heal this rift between us
and start accepting why we're
motivated, why we have
the desires we have,
and the attractions we have.
We're right now, I think,
at the most confused point
we may have ever been.
>>AMARA: I agree.
It's messy.
It's confusing.
>>REGINA: And you do have to
muck around a bit to find out
what is at the base of that.
>>AMARA: Yes.
And to realize that we've been--
within our lifetimes-- we've
been in very clear defined
models of this is what
it means to be man
and this is what it
means to be woman.
And those are rapidly going.
And so tons of confusion
for men of like
how am I supposed to be?
Tons of confusion for women.
And that leaves possibility.
>>REGINA: It does.
And yet at the same
time, the wonderful thing
that never changes is the
universe is based on it.
The atomic world is based on it.
There is a masculine-feminine
dynamic, electromagnetic
dynamic, that is at the base
of the creation of everything
within the cosmos.
So those dynamics
are alive within us.
And so we can still find out
which of those polarities
were more or less operating
on, and then make our choices,
and our alliances based on what
we've come to learn about that.
Am I more masculine or
feminine in my own being?
That's going to determine what
my ultimate choice will be.
But we need to be
honest about it.
You can't be a little you
know femme fatale pretending
to be one thing when you're
actually quite the opposite.
And we have a lot of that
historical trickery among women
that has gone on, too.
And that's been our
survival mechanism.
There's no demonizing men.
There's no demonizing women.
>>AMARA: Yeah, yeah.
And I think it's also very
interesting that we're also
in this process of healing
a lot of sexual trauma
and perpetration.
And it's again super messy that
so much is coming up right now.
But to stay steady with
everybody is affected by this.
>>REGINA: Everyone.
>>AMARA: Everyone is affected.
And to really keep shifting
out of black-white,
victim-perpetrator,
because that's not
going to heal anything.
But to open to this bigger
picture of what's needed now.
When things get really messy,
what's needed more than ever?
Compassion, love.
To bring that in and recognize
we're all doing our best.
>>REGINA: I agree.
Compassion, truth, and love.
>>AMARA: Yes, yes.
The holy trinity.
>>REGINA: That's right, exactly.
Well thank you so
much for your time.
And welcome back
from India and Bali.
>>AMARA: Thank you.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: I hope you've
found some comfort
in these very basic,
but truthful, steps
for feminine empowerment.
Again the name of the book is
"Warrior Goddess Training."
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]